# Puck - A build manager for modular C++-Projects using Conan and CMake

Puck orchestrates the setup and build of modular projects that consist of
multiple subprojects, each in their own repositories that might depend on each
other.

Projects and their dependencies are defined in a puck workspace, which is shared
between team members for example. Build profiles that define the conan profiles
to use are defined locally for each developer or machine.

Puck combines these pieces of information and orchestrates the execution of
conan and cmake (the only supported build tool at the moment).

## Puck Workspace

The puck workspace is a folder containing a `puck-workspace.json` file. Usually,
the subprojects can also be found in this directory. The `puck-workspace.json`
defines which subprojects are part of the workspace.

Here is an example of a workspace file that demonstrates the different
parameters:

```json
{
  "projects": [
    {
      "name": "ProjectA",
      "repository_url": "https://github.com/.../ProjectA.git",
      "conan_editable": true
    },
    {
      "name": "ProjectB",
      "repository_url": "https://github.com/.../ProjectB.git",
      "dedpends_on": [
        "ProjectA"
      ]
    },
    {
      "name": "ProjectC",
      "repository_url": "https://github.com/.../ProjectC.git",
      "no_code": true,
      "path": "Project_C"
    }
  ]
}
```

This workspace defines projects and gives their repository URLs (which are
optional). Project B defines a dependency on Project A. Puck will therefore
build Project A before starting the build of Project B, so that Project B can
use the fresh build of Project A.

In addition, Project A is defined as "conan_editable". Puck will register
Project A as a conan editable package automatically, which allows Project B to
declare its dependency on Project A in its conanfile and it can use Project A
directly without generating a conan package for Project A after every edit.

Project C is defined as "no_code", which means that the conan and cmake steps
are skipped for that project. This is usefull for subprojects that contain data,
documentation or anything that does not require processing with conan and cmake.
The project also defines a "path", which is the name of the folder to which the
project will be cloned. This path is relative to the workspace folder. If no
path is given, the folder will be the same as the project's name.

## Build Profile

The build profiles, i.e., the conan profiles and cmake settings to use, are
local settings depending on the machine where the project is built.

In the workspace folder, the profiles are described in a `puck-build.json`.

Example build profile:

```json
{
  "profiles": [
    {
      "name": "msvc-release",
      "description": "Build with MSVC in release configuration",
      "conan": {
        "profile_name": "msvc195",
        "settings": {
          "compiler.cppstd": "23",
          "build_type": "Release"
        }
      },
      "build": {
        "tool": "cmake",
        "config": "conan-msvc-release"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Each build profile has a name, for identification. Then it is connected with a
conan profile and some additional settings that are used during the conan
install step.

The profile also defines the build tool, here cmake, and the configuration
preset to use in different cmake runs.

The cmake configuration preset here is the name generated by conan when the
CMakeDeps and CMakeToolchain generators are used. This might be adapted to your
local setup. Cmake can list the available presets with `cmake --list-presets`.

### Global Build Profiles

As the build profiles might be machine dependent, they can be defined globally
so that they can be reused in different projects.

The global definitons are stored in `~/.puck/puck-build.json` and are the same
as described above.

When build profiles are defined globally, the `puck-build.json` in the workspace
can reference them via their names:

```json
{
  "profiles": [
    "msvc-release"
  ]
}
```

### Overwriting Build Profile Settings

The globally defined build profiles can be modified in the workspace
`puck-build.json`:

```json
{
  "profiles": [
    {
      "name": "local-name",
      "inherits_from": "msvc-release",
      "conan": {
        "settings": {
          "compiler.cppstd": 17
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

This takes all parameters from the globally defined msvc-release profile and
overwrites the C++-Standard version.

### Skipping Builds Locally

```json
{
  "profiles": [ ... ],
  "skip_build": [
    "ProjectB"
  ]
}
```

The build for some projects may be skipped locally. This will not skip the conan
install step for this project, just the build!

## Puck Commands

After creating the global `puck-build.json`, a projekt managed with puck can be
used like this:

1. Get the puck workspace, e.g. by cloning it
2. In the workspace, where the `puck-workspace.json` is, add a `puck-build.json`
   listing the build profiles you want to use for the subprojects

Then, a sequence of puck command can be used as follows:

1. `setup` to clone or update the subprojects
2. `install` to install the conan dependencies
3. `build` to build the subprojects
4. `check` to check the build configurations

### Setup

```sh
puck setup [--clean]
```

This clones all subprojects listed in the `puck-workspace.json`, if a repository
url is given.

If the subproject already exists, setup tries to update the projects to the
remote repository state. This might not be possible due to local changes, unless
the `--clean` option is given. In that case, **the project is cleaned
aggressively, risking loss of local changes**!

### Installing

```sh
puck install
```

Runs `conan install` for each subproject with each selected build profiles.

### Building

```sh
puck build [profiles="..."] [--target cmake_target]
```

This runs a build of the subprojects in an order that respects dependencies
between them. A list of build profiles can be specified. If not, all profiles
will be build. Also the cmake target to build can be specified (default is
`all`).

### Checking

```sh
puck check
```

Checks the profiles, resolves local and global build profiles and prints the
order in which subprojects will be built.

## Hint for Conan Build Fodler Layout

If you want to use conan with different profiles in the same project, care has
to be taken with the output folders.

One way to deal with this is an option that can be set in the conan profiles:

```toml
[conf]
tools.cmake.cmake_layout:build_folder_vars=["settings.compiler", "settings.compiler.version", "settings.build_type"]
```

This makes it that the build-folder will contain the compiler name, the compiler
version and the build type, e.g. `msvc-195-debug` and `msvc-195-release` will
be generated and the build environment will be separated.
